docs: migrate apps using loopback-component-passport (#5171)
strongloop/loopback-next: docs/site/migration/auth/passport.md

Missing instructions for your LoopBack 3 use case? Please report a [Migration docs issue](https://github.com/strongloop/loopback-next/issues/new?labels=question,Migration,Docs&template=Migration_docs.md) on GitHub to let us know.
" %}

# Migrating Passport Strategies

> This page guides on migrating lb3 apps that used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page is a guide to migrate LB3 apps that use
```

Author: agreed

[Passport Strategies](http://www.passportjs.org/) for authentication usecases.
Before following this guide, please know more about the
[@loopback/authentication-passport](https://loopback.io/doc/en/lb4/Authentication-passport.html)
package.

## Differences between LoopBack 3 and LoopBack 4

In LoopBack 3, routes can be configured explicitly as authentication providers

> using express style passport strategies middleware. Also the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using Express style passport strategies middleware. Also the
```

Author: agreed

> [lb3 passport component](https://github.com/strongloop/loopback-component-passport)

Reviewer: Perhaps it's more consistent to use `LB3` instead of `lb3` throughout the document? Similarly for `LB4`.

Author: agreed

helped with implicit authentication configuration using json files. It had
built-in model classes to search users and persist user identities.

In LoopBack 4, authentication endpoints are configured in controllers and the
`@authenticate` decorator tells which passport strategy to configure for that
API route. Also the
[@loopback/authentication-passport](https://loopback.io/doc/en/lb4/Authentication-passport.html)
package is necessary to bridge between passport strategies and the
authentication design of lb4.

## An example passport login app

To demonstrate how to implement passport strategies in LoopBack 4 and migrate
LB3 apps

> using[loopback-component-passport](https://github.com/strongloop/loopback-component-passport),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using [loopback-component-passport](https://github.com/strongloop/loopback-component-passport),
```

Author: agreed

a
[passport-login](https://github.com/strongloop/loopback-next/tree/master/examples/passport-login)
example app is now available.

This example is migrated from
[loopback-example-passport](https://github.com/strongloop/loopback-example-passport),

> It demonstrates how to use the LoopBack 4 features (like @authenticate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it demonstrates how to use the LoopBack 4 features (like `@authenticate`
```

Author: agreed

decorator, strategy providers, etc) with passport strategies. It includes the

> oauth2 strategies to interact with external OAuth providers like facebook,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OAuth2 strategies to interact with external OAuth providers like Facebook,
```

Author: agreed

> google,etc as well as local and basic strategies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
google, etc as well as local and basic strategies.
```

Reviewer: `google` -> `Google` as well.

Author: agreed

Take a look at the test cases of the
[example app](https://github.com/strongloop/loopback-next/tree/master/examples/passport-login)
and the
[mock social app for testing](https://github.com/strongloop/loopback-next/tree/master/extensions/authentication-passport/src/__tests__/acceptance/fixtures)

> You can use this example to see how to,

Reviewer 3: `how to,` => 'how to:`?

Author: agreed

> - Log in or Sign up into a LoopBack App using passport strategy modules

Reviewer 3: `Log in or Sign up` => `Log in or sign up`?

Reviewer 3: `LoopBack App` => `LoopBack application`?

Author: agreed

- Log in via external apps like Facebook or link those external profiles with a
  LoopBack user (for example, a LoopBack user can have associated

>   facebook/google accounts to retrieve pictures).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Facebook/Google accounts to retrieve pictures).
```

and for any occurrences of `Facebook` and `Google`.

Author: agreed

- Use basic or local passport strategy modules

This guide is further divided into two sections:

- [How to migrate Non-OAuth2 strategies like basic, local, etc ?](#Non-OAuth2-Strategies)
- [How to migrate OAuth2 strategies like facebook, google, etc ?](#OAuth2-Strategies)

> In each of these sections the following are explained :

Author: agreed

> A. Configuring Authentication Endpoints : Authentication endpoints are

Reviewer 3: Authentication endpoints => Login endpoints?

Author: agreed

> A. Configuring Authentication Endpoints : Authentication endpoints are

Reviewer: I'm wondering how the point A and point B maps to the sections below.  If they meant to be mapped, it might be helpful to use the same title.

Author: agreed

> controller methods that validate user credentials and provides the caller with a

Author: agreed

login session which is usually represented by an access token or a cookie.

B. Strategy Providers : In LoopBack4 passport strategies will have to be
injected into the authentication using provider classes.

## Non OAuth2 Strategies

> - How to use passport strategies for authentication schemes like basic, local,

Reviewer: Do you mean this section will cover how to use passport strategies... ?

Author: @dhmlau agreed, rephrasing to `How to implement authentication schemes like basic, local, etc using passport strategies`

    );
    return user.profiles;
  }
```

### Strategy Providers

- Create a provider class that instantiates a passport strategy and wraps it
  with a strategy adapter. Please read on
  [@loopback/authentication-passport](https://loopback.io/doc/en/lb4/Authentication-passport.html).

```ts
/**
 * basic passport strategy
 */
@bind(asAuthStrategy)
export class BasicStrategy implements AuthenticationStrategy {
  name = 'basic';
  passportstrategy: Strategy;
  strategy: StrategyAdapter<User>;

  constructor(
    @repository(UserRepository)
    public userRepository: UserRepository,
  ) {
    /**
     * create a basic passport strategy with verify function to validate credentials
     */
    this.passportstrategy = new Strategy(this.verify.bind(this));
    /**
     * wrap the passport strategy instance with an adapter to plugin to LoopBack authentication
     */
    this.strategy = new StrategyAdapter(
      this.passportstrategy,
      this.name,
      mapProfile.bind(this),
    );
  }

  /**
   * authenticate a request
   * @param request
   */
  async authenticate(request: Request): Promise<UserProfile | RedirectRoute> {
    return this.strategy.authenticate(request);
  }
}
```

> - Passport strategies also require a verify function to validate user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Passport strategies also require a `verify` function to validate user
```

Author: agreed

  ServiceMixin(RepositoryMixin(RestApplication)),
) {
  constructor(options: ApplicationConfig = {}) {
    super(options);

    this.add(createBindingFromClass(BasicStrategy));

    this.sequence(MySequence);
    this.component(AuthenticationComponent);
  }
}
```

## OAuth2 Strategies

- how to use passport strategies for oauth2 authorization flow with external
  social apps like facebook.
- this involves redirecting to an external app and user entering credentials in
  that app's login page.
- this usecase includes multiple phases of authentication.

### Authentication Endpoints

- For OAuth2 authorizaton flow, we need authentication endpoints that
  participate to get the user validated with an external system.
- This essentially means the `@authenticate` decorator is used with different
  sematics compared to the non-oauth2 section above.
- Here the controller methods become small parts of the larger oauth2 dialog.
- We ideally create a controller with two endpoints decorated with
  `@authenticate(`{passport-strategy-name}`)`
- One of the endpoints is for redirecting to the external provider app and the
  other is for getting called back by the external app.

>   - Create a controller with authentication endpoints as in below example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Create a controller with authentication endpoints as in below example:
```

Missing instructions for your LoopBack 3 use case? Please report a [Migration docs issue](https://github.com/strongloop/loopback-next/issues/new?labels=question,Migration,Docs&template=Migration_docs.md) on GitHub to let us know.
" %}

# Migrating Passport Strategies

This page is a guide to migrate LB3 apps that use

> [Passport Strategies](http://www.passportjs.org/) for authentication usecases.

Reviewer 3: `usecases` => `use cases`.

Author: agreed

using Express style passport strategies middleware. Also the
[LB3 passport component](https://github.com/strongloop/loopback-component-passport)
helped with implicit authentication configuration using json files. It had
built-in model classes to search users and persist user identities.

In LoopBack 4, authentication endpoints are configured in controllers and the
`@authenticate` decorator tells which passport strategy to configure for that
API route. Also the
[@loopback/authentication-passport](https://loopback.io/doc/en/lb4/Authentication-passport.html)
package is necessary to bridge between passport strategies and the
authentication design of LB4.

## An example passport login app

To demonstrate how to implement passport strategies in LoopBack 4 and migrate
LB3 apps using
[loopback-component-passport](https://github.com/strongloop/loopback-component-passport),
a
[passport-login](https://github.com/strongloop/loopback-next/tree/master/examples/passport-login)
example app is now available.

This example is migrated from
[loopback-example-passport](https://github.com/strongloop/loopback-example-passport),

> it demonstrates how to use the LoopBack 4 features (like @authenticate

Author: agreed

decorator, strategy providers, etc) with passport strategies. It includes OAuth2
strategies to interact with external OAuth providers like Facebook, Google, etc
as well as local and basic strategies.

Take a look at the test cases of the
[example app](https://github.com/strongloop/loopback-next/tree/master/examples/passport-login)
and the
[mock social app for testing](https://github.com/strongloop/loopback-next/tree/master/extensions/authentication-passport/src/__tests__/acceptance)

You can use this example to see how to:

- Log in or sign up into a LoopBack application using passport strategy modules
- Log in via external apps like Facebook or link those external profiles with a
  LoopBack user (for example, a LoopBack user can have associated
  Facebook/Google accounts to retrieve pictures).
- Use basic or local passport strategy modules

This guide is further divided into two sections:

> - [How to migrate Non-OAuth2 strategies like basic, local, etc ?](#Non-OAuth2-Strategies)

Author: agreed

> - [How to migrate OAuth2 strategies like Facebook, Google, etc ?](#OAuth2-Strategies)

Author: agreed

In each of these sections the following are explained:

A. Configuring Authentication Endpoints: Authentication/Login endpoints are
controller methods that validate user credentials and provide the caller with a
login session which is usually represented by an access token or a cookie.

B. Strategy Providers: In LoopBack4 passport strategies will have to be injected
into the authentication using provider classes.

## Non OAuth2 Strategies

> - How to implement authentication schemes like basic, local, etc using passport

Reviewer: Do you mean "This section shows how to implement authentication schemes like basic, local, etc using passport strategies"?

Author: agreed

  strategies
- These authentication schemes validate users immediately without the need for
  redirection ie., authentication happens in a single phase in one
  request-response cycle.

### Configuring Authentication Endpoints

> 

Reviewer: IIUC, you might want to add:
`You can configure the authentication endpoints with the following steps:`

Author: agreed

  credentials in the request. Include the `verify` function in the provider
  class.

```ts
  /**
   * authenticate user with provided username and password
   *
   * @param username
   * @param password
   * @param done
   *
   * @returns User model
   */
  verify(
    username: string,
    password: string,
    done: (error: any, user?: any) => void,
  ): void {
    this.userRepository
      .find({
        where: {
          email: username,
        }
      })
      .then((users: User[]) => {
        const user = users[0];
        if (!user.credentials || user.credentials.password !== password) {
          return done(null, false);
        }
        // Authentication passed, return user profile
        done(null, user);
      })
      .catch(err => {
        done(err);
      });
  }
```

- Bind the strategy provider class to the application

```ts
export class UserApplication extends BootMixin(
  ServiceMixin(RepositoryMixin(RestApplication)),
) {
  constructor(options: ApplicationConfig = {}) {
    super(options);

    this.add(createBindingFromClass(BasicStrategy));

    this.sequence(MySequence);
    this.component(AuthenticationComponent);
  }
}
```

## OAuth2 Strategies

> 

Reviewer: Similar to the above comment, do you mean 
`This section shows how to use .....` ?

Author: agreed

> - how to use passport strategies for oauth2 authorization flow with external

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- how to use passport strategies for OAuth2 authorization flow with external
```

Author: agreed

  social apps like Facebook.
- this involves redirecting to an external app and user entering credentials in
  that app's login page.
- this usecase includes multiple phases of authentication.

### Configuring Authentication Endpoints

- For OAuth2 authorizaton flow, we need authentication endpoints that
  participate to get the user validated with an external system.
- This essentially means the `@authenticate` decorator is used with different

>   sematics compared to the non-oauth2 section above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  sematics compared to the non-OAuth2 section above.
```

> - Here the controller methods become small parts of the larger oauth2 dialog.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Here the controller methods become small parts of the larger OAuth2 dialog.
```

Author: agreed

- We ideally create a controller with two endpoints decorated with
  `@authenticate(`{passport-strategy-name}`)`
- One of the endpoints is for redirecting to the external provider app and the
  other is for getting called back by the external app.

  - Create a controller with authentication endpoints as in below example:

    - A method to redirect to the third party app (method `loginToThirdParty` in
      the below example)

      - an endpoint for api clients to login via a third party app
      - the passport strategy identifies this call as a redirection to third
        party
      - this endpoint redirects to the third party authorization url

    - A method for the third Party app to callback
      - this is the callback for the thirdparty app (method `thirdPartyCallBack`
        in the below example)
      - on successful user login the third party calls this endpoint with an
        access code

>       - the passport oauth2 strategy exchanges the code for an access token

Reviewer: `oauth2` -> `OAuth2` - similar for other instances. 

```suggestion
      - the passport OAuth2 strategy exchanges the code for an access token
```

Author: agreed
